\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c
@c    This file is part of tk707.
@c
@c    Copyright (C) 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004 Chris Willing and Pierre Saramito 
@c
@c    tk707 is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
@c    it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
@c    the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
@c    (at your option) any later version.
@c
@c    Foobar is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
@c    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
@c    GNU General Public License for more details.
@c
@c    You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c    along with Foobar; if not, write to the Free Software
@c    Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
@c
@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@c             PREAMBLE
@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@c %**start of header
@setfilename tk707.info
@settitle    The TK-707 Rhythm Composer
@finalout
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@include version.texi

@ifinfo
This program is intended to mimic the operation of
Roland's TR-707 Rhythm Composer (successor to the TR-606 and
precursor to TR-808 and TR-909).

Copyright @copyright{} 2000, 2001 by Chris Willing and Pierre Saramito. All rights reserved.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.
@end ifinfo

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@titlepage
@title    TK-707
@subtitle The TK-707 Rhythm Composer
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@author   by Chris Willing and Pierre Saramito

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2000, 2001 by Chris Willing and Pierre Saramito. All rights reserved.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.
@end titlepage


@ifinfo
@node Top,,, (dir)
@top
This document is a brief statement of requirements to run tk707
and a very introductory explanation of how to run it. This might
be just enough for people not familiar with how these machines work
but is not intended to be an exhaustive explanation.

@dircategory Sound
@direntry
* tk707: (tk707).        The TK-707 Rhythm Composer.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Installation::
* Terminology::
* Demonstrations::
* Creating patterns::
* Playing patterns::
* Creating tracks::
* Editing tracks::
* Playing tracks::
* Sound maps::
* Midi files::
* Tempo changes::
* Last step changes::
* Scale changes::
* Accents and flam::
* Command line options::
* Converting MIDI to audio WAV and MP3::
* Copying::
* Index::
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@chapter Installation
@c -------------------------------------------------------------

@include INSTALL.texi

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@chapter Getting started
@node    Terminology,,, Top
@section Terminology
@c -------------------------------------------------------------

@cindex track
@cindex pattern
@cindex step

	Four song @emph{tracks} are available. 
You can think of a track as a song.
Tracks are labeled by roman numbers: I, II, III and IV.

	Each track is made of @emph{patterns}, each with 16 @emph{steps}.s
 You could think of
a pattern as a bar of music. At each step in a pattern, any of the available
instruments can be set to play. Once you've made the patterns you want to
use, you can combine them in any order into any of the four available
tracks. Any particular pattern can be used in any of the tracks as many
times as desired.

@cindex group (pattern)

	There are 64 patterns available in 4 @emph{groups} of 16 each.
Pattern groups are labeled by letters: A, B, C and D.
The 4 groups are not at all related to the 4 tracks. Patterns from any group are
available to any track.

@c --------------------
@node    Demonstrations,,, Top
@section Demonstrations
@c --------------------
@cindex midi output channel
@cindex @file{.dat} tk707 file
@cindex demonstration file @file{demo.dat}
@cindex @code{File->Load Demo} menu

	Some sample patterns and tracks are in @file{demo.dat} which can be
loaded from the @code{File->Demo} menu. Something exists in each track of this
file so click the @key{START} button and you should hear something if your
hardware is set up correctly. Part of this set up is the @emph{midi channel};
the default midi channel is 10 (the default for D-110 drum sounds). You can
change the output midi channel via the Midi menu or Shift-click on the
@key{MIDI CH} button; a new window will appear for midi channel selection.

@cindex @file{.map} tk707 sound map file
@cindex sound map file
@cindex file @file{727.map}
@cindex demonstration file @file{son-montuno.dat}
@cindex latin percussion
@cindex @code{Map->Load Standard Sound Map}
 	A second demonstration file shows the alternate @emph{727} latin sound
map. With this sound map, the software emulates a Roland @emph{727}
latin percussion rhythm composer.
Loaded from the @code{File->Demo} menu the file @file{son-montuno.dat},
and then load the latin percussion sound map @file{727.map} from
the @code{Map->Load Standard Sound Map} menu.
Set also the tempo to 200 bpm.
Then, click the @key{START} button.

@cindex file @file{7c7.map}
	An alternate sound map for latin percussion is @file{7c7.map}.
The @code{c} in @code{7c7} stands for cuba@footnote{
An excellent introduction to afro-cuban rhythms can be founded in
'Les tumbaos de la salsa', by Daniel Genton, Editions
Musicales Francaise, 2000. email: Topdjembe@@hotmail.com.}.
can be loaded in the @code{Map->Load Standard Sound Map}. 
This file has no Roland latin percussion rhythm composer equivalent,
and has been designed for our pleasure. Click the @key{START} button
and you will hear the file @file{son-montuno.dat} with another feeling.


@cindex brazilian percussion
@cindex file @file{7b7.map}
@cindex file @file{carioca.dat}
Finally, a brazilian sound map @file{7b7.map} is presented.
The @code{b} in @code{7b7} stands for brazil@footnote{
This sound map is indented for batucada music for carnaval.} and
can be loaded together with the @file{carioca.dat} demonstration.
A good tempo is 220 bpm for the samba carioca.

There is no more demonstration file for these sound maps, since 
it is time for you to compose your music !

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Creating patterns,,, Top
@section Creating patterns
@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex pattern

@subsection Writing pattern

	Shift-click the @key{PATTERN} button to enter Pattern Write mode. While
@key{START} is not pressed, the 16 instrument/step keys at the bottom of the
interface are dual purposed.

	Clicking on a key changes which pattern, 1-16, (within the current
group) is selected for writing. A small lamp above one of the @emph{group pattern}
buttons indicates the current group. The current group may be changed by
clicking group pattern button @key{A}, @key{B}, @key{C} or @key{D}.

@cindex instrument
@cindex step

	Shift-clicking on the @emph{instrument/step} keys selects which instrument
is selected to be written into the current pattern. Click the @key{START}
button; now as you click of the instrument/step keys, the selected
instrument, e.g. @key{Cowbell}, will be added at that step. If the selected
instrument has already been set at that step, then clicking there will
remove it. To select another instrument, press the @key{STOP/CONT} button
then select another instrument using Shift-click on the appropriate
instrument/step key.

	Continue adding instruments at the required steps to complete the
pattern. Make all the patterns you will need for a new song.

	A pattern may be cleared of all notes while in Pattern Write mode;
clicking on the @key{CLEAR} button will raise a dialog window to confirm
clearing of the current pattern.

@subsection Copy/paste and copy/merge 
@cindex pattern copy/paste
@cindex pattern copy/merge

	Another method of creating new patterns is to copy an existing
pattern and pasting it to a new location, then modifying the new version.
This is an efficient method of creating a number of patterns which are
small variations of each other. Select the pattern to be copied and press
@key{CRTL}-@key{C} (@key{CONTROL} key and @key{C} key together). 

	Now select a new (empty?)
pattern location and press @key{Ctrl}-@key{V} or @key{Ctrl}-@key{B} 
to @emph{paste} in the copied notes.

Using @key{Ctrl}-@key{V} will clear the destination location of any notes it already
contains whereas @key{Ctrl}-@key{B} will @emph{merge} its current contents with the new note
information.

@subsection The pattern display grid
@cindex pattern display grid

	The third method uses the pattern display grid. Double-click near
an instrument/step intersection to add the instrument at that step. If
the instrument already exists at that step then it is deleted. This is
probably the easiest way of creating patterns.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Playing patterns,,, Top
@section Playing patterns
@c -------------------------------------------------------------

        Click the @key{PATTERN} button to enter Pattern Play mode.
While the @key{START} button is depressed, the currently selected pattern will play.
Clicking on different pattern keys at the bottom of the interface will
select a new pattern (@key{1},..,@key{16}) in the current group. If not currently playing,
the new pattern is displayed immediately. If a pattern is already playing,
the new pattern will play when the current pattern is finished.

        Selecting a different group also changes the current pattern,
i.e. if pattern 7 in group I is selected, then when group 2 is selected
the new pattern will be pattern 7 in group II. Sixteen patterns are
available in each of the four groups for a total of sixty-four patterns.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Creating tracks,,, Top
@section Creating tracks
@c -------------------------------------------------------------

        Shift-click the @key{TRACK} button to enter Track Write mode.

        To start from an empty track, delete anything already there (Shift-click
on the @key{CLEAR} button) if necessary. Now select a pattern to add to the track
and click on the enter key as many times as that pattern is required. Then
select the next pattern to add and click on the enter key as many times as
that pattern is required.

        E.g., selecting pattern 3 and clicking on the @key{ENTER} button 4 times,
then selecting pattern 9 and clicking on the @key{ENTER} button 2 times will
result in a track of six measures - 4 of pattern 3 followed by 2 measures
of pattern 9.

        Changes to a track being created can be made.
@xref{Editing tracks}.

        The currently selected pattern can be heard playing if the @key{START} button
is clicked. This enables an audible preview of selected patterns prior
to adding them to the track.


@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Editing tracks,,, Top
@section Editing tracks
@c -------------------------------------------------------------

        Shift-click the @key{TRACK} button to enter Track Write mode.

        Track editing is only possible in Track Write mode.

        Deletions of tracks (or parts of them) require confirmation (via a
dialog window).

        Shift-click on the @key{CLEAR} button deletes all of the current track.

        Ctrl-click on the @key{CLEAR} button deletes the current measure from the track.

        Shift-Ctrl-click on the @key{CLEAR} button deletes the rest of the current track,
including the current measure. On some systems (including mine!) this
actually requires the @key{Ctrl} key as well i.e. @key{Shift} + @key{Ctrl} keys 
+ mouse click.
Consider this a minor bug to be fixed sometime.

        Adding patterns to a track involves selecting a pattern then a click or
Shift-click on the @key{ENTER} button. Think of Shift-click on @key{ENTER} as an insert
operation into the track before the current measure. An ordinary click on
@key{ENTER} is actually a replacement operation i.e. it will replace the current
measure with the currently selected pattern. However if you're at the end
of the current track this behaves like an append operation - it adds new
measures to the end of the track.

        The currently selected pattern can be heard playing if the @key{START} button
is clicked. This enables an audible preview of selected patterns prior
to adding them to the track.

        Different parts of the track can be accessed by clicking on the @key{BACK}
and @key{FWD} buttons. Shift-click on the @key{LAST MEAS} button to go to the end of
the track. Note that this goes to the measure just past the end of the
track (ready to write the next measure). An ordinary click on the @key{LAST MEAS}
button will momentarily show the last (+1) measure while the button is
held down.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Playing tracks,,, Top
@section Playing tracks
@c -------------------------------------------------------------

@cindex track selection

Click on the @key{TRACK} button to enter the @code{Track Play} mode.
Then click on the @key{START} button and the current track will be
played.

Select another track, e.g. track IV, by
Shift-clicking a the corresponding track button:
@key{Shift}-@key{IV}. Then enter @key{START} for playing the song.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Tempo changes,,, Top
@section Tempo changes
@c -------------------------------------------------------------

@cindex tempo

	The tempo may be changed in either Track or Pattern mode. The tempo
is lowered by Clicking in the tempo dial and then Click-Dragging around.
It  its increased by Click-Dragging to the left from the tempo dial; its increased
by Click-Dragging to the right.

@cindex midi file

	Tempo changes can't be written into a track. If saving a track as an
midi file, the whole track will have whatever tempo is selected at the
time of saving.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@chapter Midi files and sounds
@node    Midi files,,, Top
@section Midi files
@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex midi file

@cindex @code{Midi File->Save} menu

	Currently only single track Midi files can be exported. When the
@code{Midi File->Save} is selected a file browser appears into which the name
of the file is entered. Its not crucial but it is a convention to
have a @file{.mid} ending on the filename. When a name has been nominated,
the current track will be exported, including midi channel and tempo
information i.e. make sure these have the values you want first.

@cindex tempo

	Tempo changes can't be written into a track. If saving a track as an
midi file, the whole track will have whatever tempo is selected at the
time of saving.

@cindex volume control

	Volume controls are used when saving a midi file:
master, accent and volume controls associated to instruments.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Sound maps,,, Top
@section Sound maps
@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex sound map
@cindex instrument
@cindex midi note
@cindex pattern display grid
@cindex volume control

	TK-707 @emph{sound maps} are mappings of the 16 instrument keys to
descriptions of their long names, short names, abbreviate name and midi note values.
The first (longer) names are used in the pattern grid display, while the
second (shorter) names are used under the 16 instrument keys
and abbreviations are used under the volume controls. The midi
note values need to correspond to values recognized by the sound module
being used with TK-707 (either external or built into a sound card).
Appropriate values will need to be gleaned from your hardware documentation,
however the built in values should work on any module conforming to
the General Midi standard.

@cindex sound map @file{707.dat}
@cindex sound map @file{727.dat}

The built-in sound map is supplied as an example in the @file{707.map} file.
A second file, @file{727.map}, is supplied and can be loaded to play with
the sounds of Roland's TR-727, the latin percussion counterpart of the
TR-707. Note that the 727 mapping won't work on a 707 because it doesn't
recognize the necessary range of midi note values. It will work on
modules (such as Roland D-110) which do recognize the necessary range.

@cindex @code{Map->Load Local Sound Map} menu

Files with similar layout to the supplied @file{.map} can be constructed using a
text editor and loaded into TK-707 from the @code{Map->Load Local Sound Map} menu.

@cindex @code{Map->Edit Sound Map} menu

Alternatively, the currently loaded sound map can be edited via an editing
interface which is accessed from the @code{Map->Edit Sound Map} menu. Just change
the name, short name and midi note values as required and press the @key{APPLY}
button to apply the new settings to TK-707. The Cancel button will revert
sound setting to whatever they were before the editing window was started.
The @key{OK} button will apply the currently edited settings and close the
editing window.

As new midi note values are entered for an instrument, the sound that they
access in the midi sound module can be previewed using the @key{TEST} buttons.
To speed the process of finding suitable sounds, three keyboard/mouse
shortcuts are provided:
@itemize @bullet
@item
	@key{Shift} + @key{Mouse button 1} in the "Note" widget
	increments the value by 1 and test plays the new sound;
@item
	@key{Ctrl} + @key{Mouse button 1} in the "Note" widget
	decrements the value by 1 and test plays the new sound;
@item
	@key{Mouse button 2} in the "Note" widget and dragging up or down
	continuously decrement or increments the note value and test plays.
the new sound.
@end itemize

@cindex @code{Map->Save Sound Map} menu

Any editing of sound maps are lost if TK-707 is closed down without saving
the sound map. A sound map can be saved using the @code{Map->Save Sound Map} menu
item. A file suffix of @file{.map} is recommended (but not absolutely required).

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@chapter Ternary feelings and poly-rhythms
@node    Scale changes,,, Top
@section Scale changes
@c -------------------------------------------------------------

@cindex scale

	This feature is related to fast figures and 6/8 figures.

	Four scales are available on each pattern.
Click on the @key{SCALE} in Pattern Write mode for changing the scale
of the current pattern.
A small lamp on the left of the musical score score
indicates the current scale. For each scale, a vertical bar
indicates the duration of a whole note.

@subsection Binary 4/4 measures
@cindex whole note decomposition
@c
	On the first scale, the whole note duration is 
	decomposed into sixteenth. Each sixteenth is associated to the
	a step of the pattern. 
	There is 16 sixteenth in the pattern
	if the last step is set to 16, and then
	the total duration of the pattern is those of a whole note.

	This is the default scale when creating pattern
	associated to a 4/4 measure.

@subsection Binary 2/4 measures

	For the second scale, the whole duration is
	decomposed into eighthes. Each eighthes is associated
	to a step of the pattern. When the last step is set to
	16, there is 16 eighthes in the pattern, and the total duration
	of the pattern is those of a half whole.
	When playing such pattern, lamps associated to steps
	are turning twice faster !
	The pattern is then a 2/4 measure.
	The whole duration should be recovered in a song by
	inserting two of such patterns.

	This scale is designated for fast schemes on binary
	songs.

@subsection Triplets and composed 12/4 measures
@cindex ternary feeling
@cindex last step

	On the third scale, the whole duration is decomposed into
	four third of a quarter. Each third of a quarter is
	associated to a step of the pattern. 

	When the last step is set to 12,
	the total duration of the pattern is those of a whole note @pxref{Last step changes}.
	The pattern is then a 12/4 measure.

 	Alternatively, the last could be set to 9 or 15 and then
	the pattern is a 9/4 or a 15/4 measure, respectively.

	This pattern is designated for ternary-based measures or
	for inserting ternary feelings (triplets) into
	a binary song.

@subsection Sextuplets and composed 12/8 measures
@cindex demonstration file @file{son-montuno.dat}
@cindex poly-rhythms 12/8
@c
	Finally, the fourth scale decomposes the whole duration 
	into two sextuplets (12 times 1/6 of a quarter sextuplets).
	Each 1/6 of a quarter is associated to a step of the
	pattern.
	When the last step is set to 12. @xref{Last step changes},
	the total duration of the pattern is those
	of a half whole note.
	The whole duration should be recovered in a song by
	inserting two of such patterns.
	The pattern is then a 12/8 measure.

@cindex last step

	Since each quarter is represented by 6 steps on
	the pattern, we are able to superpose binary and ternary
	schemes, i.e. poly-rhythmic effects.

	The @file{son-montuno.dat} demonstrates such effects.

	This pattern is designated for fast schemes on
	ternary based measures or
	for inserting ternary feelings (triplets) into
	a binary song.


@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Last step changes,,, Top
@section Last step changes
@c -------------------------------------------------------------

@cindex last step

Remarks that the last step is not automatically
changed from 16 to 12 when changing the scale of a pattern. 
It could be chosen to 15 for the scale 3, for instance.

Click on the @key{LAST STEP} in Pattern Write mode for changing the scale.
A new window will appear for last scale
selection of the last step associated to the current pattern.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@chapter Accents and flam
@node    Accents and flam,,, Top
@section Accents
@c -------------------------------------------------------------

@subsection Inserting accentuated notes

@cindex accent
@cindex grid marker: orange
@cindex pattern step write
@cindex pattern tap write

There is two available accents: a weak and a strong one.
Use the weak accent 
by clicking on the @key{ACCENT} button in Pattern Step Write 
or Pattern Tap Write modes. 
The "accent" text at the bottom of the button becomes orange.
Enter then notes as usual: notes are @emph{weakly accentuated} and
the circle marker is orange, instead of the usual grey.

@cindex grid marker: red

Use the strong accent by clicking a second times on the @key{ACCENT} 
button.
Now, the "accent" text becomes red.
Then, enter notes: they are @emph{strongly accentuated}
and the circle marker is red too.

Then, click a third times on the @key{ACCENT} button.
The "accent" text at the bottom of the button comes back to
the initial foreground color. 
When you insert notes, they will be no more accentuated.

In Pattern Step Write mode, you could also insert notes
by using the @key{1},..,@key{16} step touchs.
Conversely, in Pattern Tap Write, you could also 
use the instrument keys, e.g. @key{Cowbell}.

@subsection Controlling the accent intensity
@c -----------------------------------------

@cindex volume control

The weak and strong accent intensities could be
modulated by using the volume control labeled "AC".
Moves the label control up and down. 
When up, accent effects are maximum while when down,
there is no more perceptible accent effects.
The volume control of accents is global.

@c -----------
@section Flam
@c -----------

@cindex flam
@cindex grace note
@cindex pattern display grid
@cindex grid marker: star

@subsection Inserting flams
@c ------------------------- 
 
Flam is a kick note written ahead of the main beat,
and takes on the effect of a @emph{grace note}.
Control-double-click 
(@key{Control}-@key{Button-1} two times)
near an instrument/step intersection
to insert a flam note for this instrument at that step.
Instead of the circle marker, a star marker represents the flam note
at the selected intersection @pxref{Creating patterns}.

@cindex Pattern Step Write

There is another way for inserting flams:
In Pattern Step Write mode, click the @key{START} button; 
Select an instrument by shift-clicking on an instrument/step key,
e.g. @key{Shift}-@key{Snare}.
Now, as usual, as you click on the instrument/step keys, the selected
snare will be added at that step 4.
Instead of this, if you control-click on the instrument/step keys, 
e.g. @key{Ctrl}-@key{4}, then a snare note with a flam is inserted
at step 4.

@cindex Pattern Tap Write
Conversely, in Pattern Tap Write mode, enter a flam by 
using the @key{Ctrl}-@key{Cowbell}.
 
@cindex accent

Flam could be combined with accents, and the associated
star marker becomes orange or red, depending on the weak or strong accent.

@subsection Controlling the flam interval
@c -------------------------------------- 
@cindex flam interval

The time between the grace note and its following main note
can be varied in the range 0:4.
The default value is 2.
A zero value means that flam is off.
Each pattern has an associated flam interval value.

Click on the @key{FLAM/SHUFFLE} button in Pattern Write mode
for changing the flam interval of the current pattern.
A new window will appear for the flam interval selection.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@appendix Command line options
@node    Command line options,,, Top
@c -------------------------------------------------------------

@section Synopsis
@example
   tk707 options...
@end example

@section  Options
@table @code
 @item -l
	List the available sound ports
 @item -p @var{port}
	Use this port
 @item -small
 @item -medium
 @item -normalsize
	Set the size of the window, since some screens are too small
   	for the whole window.
 @item -display @var{screen id}
	Display to use.
@cindex @code{xwininfo}
 @item -use @var{window id}.
	Id of window in which to embed application.
	See @code{xwininfo}.
 @item -geometry
	Initial geometry for window
 @item -colormap
	Colormap for main window
 @item -name
	Name to use for application
 @item -sync
	Use synchronous mode for display server
 @item -visual
	Visual for main window.
 @item -h
 @item -help
	Print short help.
@end table

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@appendix Converting MIDI to audio WAV and MP3::
@node    Converting MIDI to audio WAV and MP3,,, Top
@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex midi file format
@cindex audio file format
@cindex midi-to-audio converters
@cindex @file{.wav} audio file
@cindex @file{.mp3} audio file
@cindex @file{.mid} midi file
@cindex @code{timidity} midi-to-wav converter
@cindex @code{lame} wav-to-mp3 converter
@cindex @code{mpg123} mp3 player

This small annex explain how to convert your output
midi file to formatted audio file (ex. RIFF WAVE)
and compressed MP3 audio files. We assume your have
converted your file @file{salsa.dat} into MIDI format @file{salsa.mid}
in the @code{tk707} environment @pxref{Midi files}.

Then enter the commands:
@example
        timidity bolero.mid -Ow bolero.wav
        lame -b128 bolero.wav bolero.mp3
@end example
and compare the file sizes:
@example
        ls -al 
	-rw-r--r--   1 maria martinez     1051 Mar  9 09:20 son-montuno.mid
	-rw-r--r--   1 maria martinez  3937324 Mar  9 09:22 son-montuno.wav
	-rw-r--r--   1 maria martinez   493056 Mar  9 09:22 son-montuno.mp3
@end example
The MIDI file does not contains the sounds. It contains only the score
of your music and a MIDI render is required to heat it.
The audio WAV and MP3 contains the complete sound and are suitable
exports, such as CD-ROM writers.
Moreover, the MP3 file is compressed by rougthly a factor ten.
The MP3 audio files can be played back by popular mp3  players  such
as  mpg123.

The @code{timidity} tool is a midi-to-wav converter available
at @url{http://www.goice.co.jp/member/mo/timidity}.

The @code{lame} tool is a wav-to-mp3 convarter available
at @url{http://www.sulaco.org/mp3}.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Copying,,, Top
@include gpl.texi
@c -------------------------------------------------------------


@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Index,,, Top
@unnumbered Index
@c -------------------------------------------------------------

@printindex cp

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@c             TABLE OF CONTENTS
@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@shortcontents
@contents
@bye
@c -------------------------------------------------------------
